docs/index.md, before:

[Concrete Schema documentation](http://hltcoe.github.io/concrete/schema/)
=========================================================================

# Getting started

In this document, we'll work toward getting users started with Concrete. This
document is not intended to be comprehensive tutorial, but rather a starting
point for exploration.

## What is Concrete?

Concrete is a data serialization format for NLP. It replaces ad-hoc XML, CSV, or
programming language-specific serialization as a way of storing document- and
sentence- level annotations. Concrete is based on Apache Thrift and thus works
cross-platform and in almost all popular programming languages, including
Javascript, C++, Java, and Python. To learn more about design considerations and
motivation, have a look at the white paper,
[Ferraro et al. (2014)](http://cs.jhu.edu/~ferraro/papers/ferraro-concrete-2014.pdf). The
details of the data format (schema) are described
[here](http://hltcoe.github.io/concrete/schema/).

In addition to data serialization, we provide Concretely annotated data! We've
done the hard work of running a variety of tools, such as, Stanford's NLP
pipeline and HLTCOE/JHU NLP tools, on an abundance of data. For more information
on data release, see the Concrete homepage.

## Table of Contents

* [Getting started](#getting-started)
  * [What is Concrete?](#what-is-concrete?)
  * [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  * [Step 0: Install concrete-python](#step-0-install-concrete-python)
  * [Step 1: Get some data.](#step-1-get-some-data.)
  * [Step 2: What's in this file?](#step-2-what's-in-this-file?)
* [Programming with Concrete](#programming-with-concrete)
  * [Python](#python)
  * [Java](#java)


## Step 0: Install concrete-python

```
$ pip install concrete
```

## Step 1: Get some data.

```
wget 'https://github.com/hltcoe/quicklime/blob/master/agiga_dog-bites-man.concrete?raw=true' -O example.concrete
```

## Step 2: What's in this file?

### 2.1 Quicklime Communication viewer

Regardless of how you're ingesting the data, it's probably a good idea to view
the contents of a .comm file using Quicklime. It stands up a mini-webserver that
visualizes the data. Install Quicklime using:

```
pip install quicklime
```

To view a Concrete file:

    $ qlook.py <path-to>/example.concrete
    Listening on http://localhost:8080/
    Hit Ctrl-C to quit.

Now, open your web browser and go to the link printed to the screen
``http://localhost:8080/``. For more information about the Quicklime project,
check out the [Quicklime GitHub repo](https://github.com/hltcoe/quicklime).

### 2.2 Command-line tools

In addition to Quicklime, ``concrete-inspect.py`` is another tool for viewing
the contents of Concrete files. This utility was made available when you
installed ``concrete-python``, so you can use it in any directory. Below is some
example usage. For further usage, use the script's ``--help`` option.

#### 2.2.1 CoNLL-style output.

    $ concrete-inspect.py example.concrete --pos --ner --lemmas --dependency
    INDEX TOKEN     LEMMA    POS NER    HEAD
    ----- -----     -----    --- ---    ----
    1     John      John     NNP PERSON 4
    2     ’s        ’s       POS O      1
    3     daughter  daughter NN  O      4
    4     Mary      Mary     NNP PERSON 5
    5     expressed express  VBD O      0
    6     sorrow    sorrow   NN  O      5
    7     .         .        .   O

#### 2.2.2 Parse tree

    $ concrete-inspect.py example.concrete --treebank
    (ROOT
      (S (NP (NP (NNP John)
                 (POS ’s))
             (NN daughter)
             (NNP Mary))
         (VP (VBD expressed)
             (NP (NN sorrow)))
         (. .)))

# Programming with Concrete

Below we describe the specifics for using Concrete from [Python](#python) or [Java](#java).

## Python

As it happens, a good introductory example usage of Concrete is our handy
``concrete-inspect.py`` script. Below, we'll walk through stripped down version
of this script for simplicity.

### Installation

If you're using Python, you can install the latest release of the
``concrete-python`` module via pip directly from the Python package index.

    $ pip install concrete

### Read a Communication from a file

To read in Communication object from a file  you'd do this:

```python
>>> import concrete.util
>>> comm = concrete.util.read_communication_from_file('example.concrete')
```

### Walk the Data Structures

Then you can walk the object just as you would any other in Python. The
[thrift spec](http://hltcoe.github.io/concrete/schema/communication.html) defines the
data structures.

### Iterate over sentences and print taggings

The following code prints sentences and tags in CoNLL format, similar
``concrete-inspect.py``.

```python
for section in comm.sectionList:
    for sentence in section.sentenceList:

        # Columns of CoNLL-style output go here.
        taggings = []

        # Token text
        taggings.append([x.text for x in sentence.tokenization.tokenList.tokenList])

        if sentence.tokenization.tokenTaggingList is not None:
            # Accumulate all token taggings.
            for tagging in sentence.tokenization.tokenTaggingList:
                taggings.append([x.tag for x in tagging.taggedTokenList])

        if sentence.tokenization.dependencyParseList is not None:
            # Read dependency arcs from dependency parse tree. (Deps start at zero.)
            head = [-1]*len(sentence.tokenization.tokenList.tokenList)
            for arc in sentence.tokenization.dependencyParseList[0].dependencyList:
                head[arc.dep] = arc.gov

            # Add head index to taggings
            taggings.append(head)

        # Transpose the list. Format and print each row.
        for row in zip(*taggings):
            print '\t'.join('%15s' % x for x in row)

        print

```

Note: It is good practice to check for ``None`` on each annotation layer because
each layer is optional. When a layer is not available it is ``None``, when it is
empty it's often an empty list.

Expected output:

```
           John            John             NNP          PERSON               1
          Smith           Smith             NNP          PERSON               9
              ,               ,               ,               O              -1
        manager         manager              NN               O               1
             of              of              IN               O               3
           ACME            ACME             NNP    ORGANIZATION               6
            INC             INC             NNP    ORGANIZATION               4
              ,               ,               ,               O              -1
            was             was            AUXD               O               9
            bit             bit              RB               O              -1
             by              by              IN               O               9
              a               a              DT               O              12
            dog             dog              NN               O              10
             on              on              IN               O              12
          March           March             NNP            DATE              13
           10th            10th              CD            DATE              14
              ,               ,               ,            DATE              -1
           2013            2013              CD            DATE              14
              .               .               .               O              -1

             He              he             PRP               O               1
           died             die             VBD               O              -1
              !               !               .               O              -1

           John            John             NNP          PERSON               3
             's              's             POS               O               0
       daughter        daughter              NN               O               3
           Mary            Mary             NNP          PERSON               4
      expressed         express             VBD               O              -1
         sorrow          sorrow              NN               O               4
              .               .               .               O              -1
```

### Print Entities

Print information for all Entities and their EntityMentions (coreference
resolution).

```python
for entitySet in comm.entitySetList:
    for ei, entity in enumerate(entitySet.entityList):
        print 'Entity %s (%s)' % (ei, entity.canonicalName)
        for i, mention in enumerate(entity.mentionList):
            print '  Mention %s: %s' % (i, mention.text)
        print
    print
```

Expected output:

```
Entity 0 (John Smith , manager of ACME INC ,)
  Mention 0: John Smith , manager of ACME INC ,
  Mention 1: John Smith
  Mention 2: manager of ACME INC
  Mention 3: He
  Mention 4: John 's
```


### Print SituationMentions

Print SituationMentions (relation extraction).

Our previous example file doesn't have situations annotated, so we'll need
another Concrete file to test our code with.

```
$ wget 'https://github.com/hltcoe/quicklime/blob/master/serif_example.concrete?raw=true' -O serif_example.concrete
```

This file has run BBN-SERIF's relation and event extractor.

```python
import concrete.util
comm = concrete.util.read_communication_from_file('serif_example.concrete')

if comm.situationMentionSetList is None:
    print 'Situation mention annotations not available for this document.'

else:
    for i, situationMentionSet in enumerate(comm.situationMentionSetList):
        if situationMentionSet.metadata:
            print 'Situation Set %d (%s):' % (i, situationMentionSet.metadata.tool)
        else:
            print 'Situation Set %d:' % i
        for j, situationMention in enumerate(situationMentionSet.mentionList):
            print 'SituationMention %d-%d:' % (i, j)
            print '    text', situationMention.text
            print '    situationType', situationMention.situationType
            for k, arg in enumerate(situationMention.argumentList):
                print '    Argument %d:' % k
                print '      role', arg.role
                if arg.entityMention:
                    print '      entityMention', arg.entityMention.text
                if arg.situationMention:
                    print '      situationMention:'
                    print '        text', situationMention.text
                    print '        situationType', situationMention.situationType
            print
        print
```

Expected output:

```
Situation Set 0 (Serif: relations):
SituationMention 0-0:
    text None
    situationType ORG-AFF.Employment
    Argument 0:
      role Role.RELATION_SOURCE_ROLE
      entityMention manager of ACME INC
    Argument 1:
      role Role.RELATION_TARGET_ROLE
      entityMention ACME INC

SituationMention 0-1:
    text None
    situationType PER-SOC.Family
    Argument 0:
      role Role.RELATION_SOURCE_ROLE
      entityMention John
    Argument 1:
      role Role.RELATION_TARGET_ROLE
      entityMention daughter


Situation Set 1 (Serif: events):
SituationMention 1-0:
    text died
    situationType Life.Die
    Argument 0:
      role Victim
      entityMention He
```

## Java

### Installation

If you're using Java, you would use the following dependencies from Maven Central, which correspond to the v.4.4.4 tag of the concrete-java GitHub repo:
https://github.com/hltcoe/concrete-java

```xml
<dependency>
  <groupId>edu.jhu.hlt</groupId>
  <artifactId>concrete-core</artifactId>
  <version>4.4</version>
</dependency>
<dependency>
  <groupId>edu.jhu.hlt</groupId>
  <artifactId>concrete-util</artifactId>
  <version>4.4.4</version>
</dependency>
```

### Read a Communication from a file

You can read in a Concrete file to a Communication object as follows.

```java
CompactCommunicationSerializer ser = new CompactCommunicationSerializer();
Communication comm = ser.fromPathString(commFile.getAbsolutePath());
```

### Iterate over sentences

From there, you can just walk the Communication object as you would any other in
Java. The [thrift spec](http://hltcoe.github.io/concrete/schema/communication.html)
defines the data structures. For example, you could iterate through the
sentences as follows.

```java
for (Section cSection : comm.getSectionList()) {
    for (Sentence cSent : cSection.getSentenceList()) {
        Tokenization cToks = cSent.getTokenization();
        // ...do something with the sentence...
    }
}
```

### Get the entities and situations

To get the entities and situations you'd do something like this:

```java
// Get the entities.
List<EntityMentionSet> cEmsList = comm.getEntityMentionSetList();
EntityMentionSet cEms = cEmsList.get(0); // Since there's only one.
// Get the relations.
List<SituationMentionSet> cSmsList = comm.getSituationMentionSetList();
SituationMentionSet cSms = cSmsList.get(0); // Since there's only one.
```

Commit message:

Remove confusing big schema link at top of "Getting Started", make some clarifications/corrections to Python section and add a link to online docs.

docs/index.md, after:

# Getting started

In this document, we'll work toward getting users started with Concrete. This
document is not intended to be comprehensive tutorial, but rather a starting
point for exploration.

## What is Concrete?

Concrete is a data serialization format for NLP. It replaces ad-hoc XML, CSV, or
programming language-specific serialization as a way of storing document- and
sentence- level annotations. Concrete is based on Apache Thrift and thus works
cross-platform and in almost all popular programming languages, including
Javascript, C++, Java, and Python. To learn more about design considerations and
motivation, have a look at the white paper,
[Ferraro et al. (2014)](http://cs.jhu.edu/~ferraro/papers/ferraro-concrete-2014.pdf). The
details of the data format (schema) are described
[here](http://hltcoe.github.io/concrete/schema/).

In addition to data serialization, we provide Concretely annotated data! We've
done the hard work of running a variety of tools, such as, Stanford's NLP
pipeline and HLTCOE/JHU NLP tools, on an abundance of data. For more information
on data release, see the Concrete homepage.

## Table of Contents

* [Getting started](#getting-started)
  * [What is Concrete?](#what-is-concrete?)
  * [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  * [Step 0: Install concrete-python](#step-0-install-concrete-python)
  * [Step 1: Get some data.](#step-1-get-some-data.)
  * [Step 2: What's in this file?](#step-2-what's-in-this-file?)
* [Programming with Concrete](#programming-with-concrete)
  * [Python](#python)
  * [Java](#java)


## Step 0: Install concrete-python

```
$ pip install concrete
```

## Step 1: Get some data.

```
wget 'https://github.com/hltcoe/quicklime/blob/master/agiga_dog-bites-man.concrete?raw=true' -O example.concrete
```

## Step 2: What's in this file?

### 2.1 Quicklime Communication viewer

Regardless of how you're ingesting the data, it's probably a good idea to view
the contents of a .comm file using Quicklime. It stands up a mini-webserver that
visualizes the data. Install Quicklime using:

```
pip install quicklime
```

To view a Concrete file:

    $ qlook.py <path-to>/example.concrete
    Listening on http://localhost:8080/
    Hit Ctrl-C to quit.

Now, open your web browser and go to the link printed to the screen
``http://localhost:8080/``. For more information about the Quicklime project,
check out the [Quicklime GitHub repo](https://github.com/hltcoe/quicklime).

### 2.2 Command-line tools

In addition to Quicklime, ``concrete-inspect.py`` is another tool for viewing
the contents of Concrete files. This utility was made available when you
installed ``concrete-python``, so you can use it in any directory. Below is some
example usage. For further usage, use the script's ``--help`` option.

#### 2.2.1 CoNLL-style output.

    $ concrete-inspect.py example.concrete --pos --ner --lemmas --dependency
    INDEX TOKEN     LEMMA    POS NER    HEAD
    ----- -----     -----    --- ---    ----
    1     John      John     NNP PERSON 4
    2     ’s        ’s       POS O      1
    3     daughter  daughter NN  O      4
    4     Mary      Mary     NNP PERSON 5
    5     expressed express  VBD O      0
    6     sorrow    sorrow   NN  O      5
    7     .         .        .   O

#### 2.2.2 Parse tree

    $ concrete-inspect.py example.concrete --treebank
    (ROOT
      (S (NP (NP (NNP John)
                 (POS ’s))
             (NN daughter)
             (NNP Mary))
         (VP (VBD expressed)
             (NP (NN sorrow)))
         (. .)))

# Programming with Concrete

Below we describe the specifics for using Concrete from [Python](#python) or [Java](#java).

## Python

We provide a brief introduction to concrete-python here; for more information
see
[the online documentation](http://concrete-python.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

One place to look for example code is the handy
``concrete-inspect.py`` script. Below, we'll walk through a simplified version
of this script for simplicity.

### Installation

If you're using Python, you can install the latest release of
concrete-python (which provides the Python package ``concrete``) via pip:

    $ pip install concrete

### Read a Communication from a file

To read in Communication object from a file  you'd do this:

```python
>>> import concrete.util
>>> comm = concrete.util.read_communication_from_file('example.concrete')
```

### Walk the Data Structures

Then you can walk the object just as you would any other in Python. The
[thrift spec](http://hltcoe.github.io/concrete/schema/communication.html) defines the
data structures.

### Iterate over sentences and print taggings

The following code prints sentences and tags in CoNLL format, similar
``concrete-inspect.py``.

```python
for section in comm.sectionList:
    for sentence in section.sentenceList:

        # Columns of CoNLL-style output go here.
        taggings = []

        # Token text
        taggings.append([x.text for x in sentence.tokenization.tokenList.tokenList])

        if sentence.tokenization.tokenTaggingList is not None:
            # Accumulate all token taggings.
            for tagging in sentence.tokenization.tokenTaggingList:
                taggings.append([x.tag for x in tagging.taggedTokenList])

        if sentence.tokenization.dependencyParseList is not None:
            # Read dependency arcs from dependency parse tree. (Deps start at zero.)
            head = [-1]*len(sentence.tokenization.tokenList.tokenList)
            for arc in sentence.tokenization.dependencyParseList[0].dependencyList:
                head[arc.dep] = arc.gov

            # Add head index to taggings
            taggings.append(head)

        # Transpose the list. Format and print each row.
        for row in zip(*taggings):
            print '\t'.join('%15s' % x for x in row)

        print

```

Note: It is good practice to check for ``None`` on each annotation layer because
each layer is optional. When a layer is not available it is ``None``, when it is
empty it's often an empty list.

Expected output:

```
           John            John             NNP          PERSON               1
          Smith           Smith             NNP          PERSON               9
              ,               ,               ,               O              -1
        manager         manager              NN               O               1
             of              of              IN               O               3
           ACME            ACME             NNP    ORGANIZATION               6
            INC             INC             NNP    ORGANIZATION               4
              ,               ,               ,               O              -1
            was             was            AUXD               O               9
            bit             bit              RB               O              -1
             by              by              IN               O               9
              a               a              DT               O              12
            dog             dog              NN               O              10
             on              on              IN               O              12
          March           March             NNP            DATE              13
           10th            10th              CD            DATE              14
              ,               ,               ,            DATE              -1
           2013            2013              CD            DATE              14
              .               .               .               O              -1

             He              he             PRP               O               1
           died             die             VBD               O              -1
              !               !               .               O              -1

           John            John             NNP          PERSON               3
             's              's             POS               O               0
       daughter        daughter              NN               O               3
           Mary            Mary             NNP          PERSON               4
      expressed         express             VBD               O              -1
         sorrow          sorrow              NN               O               4
              .               .               .               O              -1
```

### Print Entities

Print information for all Entities and their EntityMentions (coreference
resolution).

```python
for entitySet in comm.entitySetList:
    for ei, entity in enumerate(entitySet.entityList):
        print 'Entity %s (%s)' % (ei, entity.canonicalName)
        for i, mention in enumerate(entity.mentionList):
            print '  Mention %s: %s' % (i, mention.text)
        print
    print
```

Expected output:

```
Entity 0 (John Smith , manager of ACME INC ,)
  Mention 0: John Smith , manager of ACME INC ,
  Mention 1: John Smith
  Mention 2: manager of ACME INC
  Mention 3: He
  Mention 4: John 's
```


### Print SituationMentions

Print SituationMentions (relation extraction).

Our previous example file doesn't have situations annotated, so we'll need
another Concrete file to test our code with.

```
$ wget 'https://github.com/hltcoe/quicklime/blob/master/serif_example.concrete?raw=true' -O serif_example.concrete
```

This file has run BBN-SERIF's relation and event extractor.

```python
import concrete.util
comm = concrete.util.read_communication_from_file('serif_example.concrete')

if comm.situationMentionSetList is None:
    print 'Situation mention annotations not available for this document.'

else:
    for i, situationMentionSet in enumerate(comm.situationMentionSetList):
        if situationMentionSet.metadata:
            print 'Situation Set %d (%s):' % (i, situationMentionSet.metadata.tool)
        else:
            print 'Situation Set %d:' % i
        for j, situationMention in enumerate(situationMentionSet.mentionList):
            print 'SituationMention %d-%d:' % (i, j)
            print '    text', situationMention.text
            print '    situationType', situationMention.situationType
            for k, arg in enumerate(situationMention.argumentList):
                print '    Argument %d:' % k
                print '      role', arg.role
                if arg.entityMention:
                    print '      entityMention', arg.entityMention.text
                if arg.situationMention:
                    print '      situationMention:'
                    print '        text', situationMention.text
                    print '        situationType', situationMention.situationType
            print
        print
```

Expected output:

```
Situation Set 0 (Serif: relations):
SituationMention 0-0:
    text None
    situationType ORG-AFF.Employment
    Argument 0:
      role Role.RELATION_SOURCE_ROLE
      entityMention manager of ACME INC
    Argument 1:
      role Role.RELATION_TARGET_ROLE
      entityMention ACME INC

SituationMention 0-1:
    text None
    situationType PER-SOC.Family
    Argument 0:
      role Role.RELATION_SOURCE_ROLE
      entityMention John
    Argument 1:
      role Role.RELATION_TARGET_ROLE
      entityMention daughter


Situation Set 1 (Serif: events):
SituationMention 1-0:
    text died
    situationType Life.Die
    Argument 0:
      role Victim
      entityMention He
```

## Java

### Installation

If you're using Java, you would use the following dependencies from Maven Central, which correspond to the v.4.4.4 tag of the concrete-java GitHub repo:
https://github.com/hltcoe/concrete-java

```xml
<dependency>
  <groupId>edu.jhu.hlt</groupId>
  <artifactId>concrete-core</artifactId>
  <version>4.4</version>
</dependency>
<dependency>
  <groupId>edu.jhu.hlt</groupId>
  <artifactId>concrete-util</artifactId>
  <version>4.4.4</version>
</dependency>
```

### Read a Communication from a file

You can read in a Concrete file to a Communication object as follows.

```java
CompactCommunicationSerializer ser = new CompactCommunicationSerializer();
Communication comm = ser.fromPathString(commFile.getAbsolutePath());
```

### Iterate over sentences

From there, you can just walk the Communication object as you would any other in
Java. The [thrift spec](http://hltcoe.github.io/concrete/schema/communication.html)
defines the data structures. For example, you could iterate through the
sentences as follows.

```java
for (Section cSection : comm.getSectionList()) {
    for (Sentence cSent : cSection.getSentenceList()) {
        Tokenization cToks = cSent.getTokenization();
        // ...do something with the sentence...
    }
}
```

### Get the entities and situations

To get the entities and situations you'd do something like this:

```java
// Get the entities.
List<EntityMentionSet> cEmsList = comm.getEntityMentionSetList();
EntityMentionSet cEms = cEmsList.get(0); // Since there's only one.
// Get the relations.
List<SituationMentionSet> cSmsList = comm.getSituationMentionSetList();
SituationMentionSet cSms = cSmsList.get(0); // Since there's only one.
```
